I really take that down okay thank you
very much I am Anna Frye the badass and
today I'm asking the question is life
really that complex now I've only got
about nine minutes to try and provide
you with an answer so what I've done is
split this neatly into two parts part
one yes and later on part two no or to
be more accurate
no and okay so first of all let me try
and define what I mean by complex now I
could give you a host of formal
definitions but in the simplest terms
any problem in complexity is something
that Einstein and his peers can't do so
let's imagine if the clicker works there
we go Einstein is playing a game of
snooker now he's a clever chap so he
knows that when he hits the cue ball he
could write you an equation and tell you
exactly where the red ball is going to
hit the sides how fast it's going and
where it's going to end up now if you
scale these snooker balls up to the size
of a solar system Einstein can still
help you sure the physics changes but if
you wanted to know about the path of the
earth around the Sun Einstein could
write you an equation telling you
exactly where both objects are at any
point in time now with the surprising
increase in difficulty
Einstein could include the moon in his
calculations but as you add more and
more planets Mars and Jupiter say the
problem gets too tough Einstein to solve
with a pen and paper now strangely if
you're instead of having a handful of
planets you had millions of objects or
even billions the problem actually
becomes much simpler and Einstein's back
in the game so let me explain what I
mean by this by scaling these objects
back down to a molecular level now if
you wanted to trace the erratic path of
an individual air molecule you'd have
absolutely no hope but when you have
millions of air molecules all together
they start act in a way which is
quantifiable predictable and well
behaved and thank goodness air is
well-behaved because if it wasn't planes
would fall out of the sky now on an even
bigger scale across the whole of the
world the idea is exactly the same with
all of these air molecules it's true
that you can't take an individual rain
droplet and say where it's come from
where it's going to end up but you can
say we've pretty good certainty whether
it's going to be cloudy tomorrow so
that's it by in Einstein's time this is
Phar science have got we could do really
small problems with a few objects with
simple interactions or we could do huge
problems with millions of objects and
simple interactions but what about
everything in the middle well just seven
years before Einstein's death an
American scientist called Warren Weaver
made exactly this point he said
scientific methodology has gone from one
extreme to another leaving out an
untouched great middle region now this
middle region is where complexity
science lies and this is what I mean by
complex now unfortunately almost every
single problem you can think of to do
with human behavior lies in this middle
region
Einstein's got absolutely no idea how to
model the movement of a crowd there are
too many people to look at them all
individually and too few to treat them
as a gas similarly and people are prone
to annoying things like decisions and
not wanting to walk into each other
which makes the problem all the more
complicated now and I'm Stein also
couldn't tell you when the next stock
market crash is going to be Einstein
couldn't tell you how to improve
unemployment Einstein can't even tell
you when the next iPhone is going to be
a hit or a flop so to conclude part 1
we're completely screwed we've got no
tools to do with this and life is way
too complex but maybe there's hope
because in the last few years we've
begun to see the beginnings of a new
area of science and using mathematics to
model our social systems and I'm not
just talking here about statistics and
computer simulations I'm talking about
writing down equations about our society
that will help us understand what's
going on in the same way as with the
snooker balls or the weather prediction
and this has come about because people
have begun to realize that we can use
and exploit analogies between our human
systems and those of the physical world
around us now to give you an example the
incredibly complex problem of migration
across Europe actually as it turns out
when you view all of the people together
collectively they behave as though
they're following the laws of gravity
now but instead here of planets being
attracted to one another it's people who
are attracted to areas with better job
opportunities higher pay better quality
of life and lower unemployment and in
the same way as people are more like
to go for opportunities close to where
they live already London to Kent for
example as opposed to London to
Melbourne the gravitational effect of
planets far away as felt much less so to
give you another example in 2008 a group
in UCLA were looking into the patterns
of burglary hotspots in a city now and
one thing about burglaries is that is
this idea of repeat victimization so if
you have a group of burglars who managed
to successfully robbed an area and what
they'll do is they'll tend to return to
that area and carry on burdening it so
they learn you know the layout of the
houses the escape routes and the local
security measures they're in place and
this will continue to happen until local
residents and police ramped up the
security at which point the burglars
will move off elsewhere and it's that
balance between burglars and security
which create these dynamic hotspots of
the city now as it turns out this is
exactly the same process as how a
leopard gets its spots except in the
leopard example it's not burglars and
security it's a chemical process and
that creates these patterns and
something called morphogenesis now we
actually know an awful lot about the
morphogenesis of leopard spots and maybe
we can use this to try and spot some of
the warning signs with burglaries and
perhaps also to create better crime
strategies to prevent crime and there's
a group here at UCL at UCL who are
working with the West Midlands police
right now on this very question now I
could give you plenty of examples like
this but I wanted to leave you with one
from my own research on the London riots
now you probably don't need me to tell
you about the events of last summer
where London in the UK saw the worst
sustained period of violence looting and
arson for over 20 years and it's
understandable that as a society we want
to try and understand exactly what
caused these riots but also perhaps to
equip our police with better strategies
to lead to a swift of resolution and in
the future now I don't upset the
sociologist here so I absolutely cannot
talk about the individual motivations
for for a rioter but when you look at
the rioters altogether mathematically
you can separate it into a three-stage
process and draw analogies accordingly
so step one let's say you've got a group
of friends none of them are involved in
the riots but one of them walks past a
footlocker which is being raided and
goes in and backs himself a new pair of
trainers now he texts one of his friends
and says you know come on down to the
riots so his friend joins him and then
the two of them takes more of their
friends who join them and texts more of
their friends and more and more and so
it continues now this process is
identical to the way that a virus
spreads through a population if you
think about the bird flu epidemic if a
couple of years ago the more people that
were infected the more people that got
infected and the faster the virus spread
before the authorities managed to get a
handle on events and it's exactly the
same process here so okay let's say
you've got a rioter he's decided he's
going to riot
the next thing has to do is pick a riot
site now what you should know about riot
is is that um crickets gone there we go
what you should know about riot is is
that they're not really prepared to
travel that far from where they live
unless it's a really juicy riot site and
so you can see that here from this graph
with an awful lot of rioters having
traveled less than a kilometer to the
site that they went to now this pattern
is seen in consumer models of retail
spending ie where we choose to go
shopping so of course people like you to
go to local shops but you'd be prepared
to go a little bit further if it was a
really good retail site and this analogy
actually was already picked up by some
of the papers with some tabloid press
calling the events shopping with
violence which probably sums it up in
terms of virus it um going backwards hmm
okay step three okay so finally the
rioters at his site and now it's an
interact and he wants to avoid getting
caught by the police
now the rioters will avoid the police at
all times but there is some safety in
numbers and on the flip side and the
police is their limited resources are
trying to protect as much of the city as
possible arrest rioters wherever
possible and to create a deterrent
effect um there we go um and actually as
it turns out this mechanism between the
two
species so to speak of rioters and
police is identical to predators and
prey in the wild so if you can imagine
rabbits and foxes rabbits are trying to
avoid foxes at all costs while foxes are
patrolling the space trying to look for
rabbits now we actually know an awful
lot about the dynamics of predators and
prey we also know a lot about the
consumer spending flows and we know a
lot about how viruses spread through a
population so if you take these three
analogies together and exploit them you
can come up with a mathematical model of
what actually happened that's capable of
replicating the general patterns of the
Wrights themselves and now once we've
got this we can almost use this as a
petri dish and start having
conversations about which areas of the
city were more susceptible than others
and what police tactics could be used if
this were ever to happen again in future
now even 20 years ago modeling of this
sort was completely unheard of but I
think that this these analogies is an
incredibly important tool in tackling
problems with our society and perhaps
ultimately improving our society overall
so to conclude life is complex but
perhaps understanding it need not
necessarily be that complicated thank
you